README.md, before:

# Engineering Resource Management System

Track engineers, projects, assignments, and available capacity in one streamlined full-stack app.

# Tech Stack

- Frontend: <br>
  React + TypeScript <br>
  ShadCN UI + TailwindCSS <br>
  React Hook Form, contextAPI

- Backend: <br>
  Node.js + Express <br>
  MongoDB + Mongoose <br>
  JWT Auth, REST APIs

# Core Features

- Auth with JWT + role-based access
- Engineer dashboard: profile + assignments
- Manager dashboard: team overview + project assign

# Demo

- Frontend: https://engineering-resource-management-system-frontend.vercel.app/
- Backend API: https://engineering-resource-management-system-backend.vercel.app/

# Setup Instructions

- git clone https://github.com/sonu2027/engineering-resource-management-system.git

Backend
- cd backend
- npm install
- npm run dev

Frontend
- cd frontend
- npm install
- npm run dev
- Make sure frontend is running at http://localhost:5173

# .env

- You don't need to create .env beacuse I haven't keep it on .gitignore

# AI Usage

# Which AI tools I used and how

- I used GitHub Copilot and ChatGPT as AI tools during the development of this project.

- I primarily used Copilot for tasks like API creation, schema design, and boilerplate generation.

- For debugging, understanding errors, and getting quick solutions, I took help from both ChatGPT and Copilot.

- Both tools were extremely helpful in accelerating development and resolving issues efficiently.

- I used ChatGPT to validate my logic, clarify doubts about implementation, and understand specific concepts when I needed deeper clarity.

# Specific examples of how AI accelerated my development

AI tools like GitHub Copilot and ChatGPT significantly accelerated my development process in several ways:

- I was able to quickly set up routes and build APIs with the help of AI, which saved a lot of time.

- Whenever I faced confusion or didn’t fully understand a concept, I used AI to gain clarity and validate my logic.

- I used AI assistance to rapidly set up ShadCN UI, which made creating reusable and styled components much faster.

- I built multiple UI components efficiently using Copilot suggestions, reducing manual effort.

- AI helped me integrate and configure React Hook Form quickly for form handling and validation.

- Overall, AI helped me move faster, solve problems in real-time, and stay focused on the core logic instead of getting stuck on repetitive or confusing tasks.

# Challenges I faced with AI-generated code and how I resolved them

- At times, relying heavily on AI-generated code led to unexpected bugs that took time to debug and fix.

- One issue I faced was while making API calls — I forgot to include http://localhost:8000 in the URL, and the AI wasn't able to clearly identify or point out this small but critical mistake. Eventually, I manually noticed the problem and fixed it myself.

- I also found it challenging to fully understand some of the AI-generated code during code reviews, especially when trying to figure out how certain logic worked internally.

- Additionally, I encountered a number of errors during development. While some were difficult to trace, I was able to resolve most of them with the help of ChatGPT and Copilot after experimenting and digging deeper.

- These challenges taught me that while AI is incredibly helpful, it's important to manually validate and understand the code, especially in critical areas.

# My approach to validating and understanding AI suggestions

To validate and understand AI-generated code suggestions, I followed a hands-on approach:

- I started by using console.log() statements to check the actual output and behavior of the code.

- I traced how the data was changing throughout different parts of the codebase.

- By observing what each line was doing to the data, I was able to break down and understand even complex code that the AI suggested.

- This step-by-step debugging approach helped me gain clarity and ensured that I wasn’t blindly copying code but actually understanding and verifying its logic.

# seed file structure

```js
import mongoose from "mongoose";
import User from "../src/models/user.model";
import Project from "../src/models/project.model";
import Assignment from "../src/models/assignment.model";
import connectDB from "../src/connectDB";
import bcrypt from "bcryptjs";

(async () => {
  try {
    await connectDB();

    // You can comment out if you need fresh data in database every single time you run this seed.js

    await User.deleteMany({});
    await Project.deleteMany({});
    await Assignment.deleteMany({});

    //  Engineers
    const engineers = await User.insertMany([
      {
        name: "Alice Dev",
        email: "alice@example.com",
        role: "engineer",
        department: "frontend",
        skills: ["React", "TailwindCSS"],
        seniority: "mid",
        employmentType: "full-time",
        maxCapacity: 100,
        availableCapacity: 40,
        password: await bcrypt.hash("engineer1", 10),
      },
      {
        name: "Bob Ops",
        email: "bob@example.com",
        role: "engineer",
        department: "devOps",
        skills: ["Docker", "Node.js"],
        seniority: "senior",
        employmentType: "part-time",
        maxCapacity: 50,
        availableCapacity: 60,
        password: await bcrypt.hash("engineer2", 10),
      },
      {
        name: "Charlie Analyst",
        email: "charlie@example.com",
        role: "engineer",
        department: "ml",
        skills: ["Python", "MongoDB"],
        seniority: "junior",
        employmentType: "full-time",
        maxCapacity: 100,
        availableCapacity: 50,
        password: await bcrypt.hash("engineer3", 10),
      },
    ]);

    //  Manager
    const manager = await User.create({
      name: "Manager Mike",
      email: "manager@example.com",
      role: "manager",
      password: await bcrypt.hash("manager1", 10),
    });

    //  Projects
    const projects = await Project.insertMany([
      {
        name: "Frontend Revamp",
        description: "Modernize the UI with React and Tailwind",
        startDate: new Date("2024-07-01"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-09-30"),
        requiredSkills: ["React", "TailwindCSS"],
        teamSize: 2,
        status: "active",
        managerId: manager._id,
      },
      {
        name: "ML Insight Tool",
        description: "Develop a prediction engine with Python",
        startDate: new Date("2024-08-15"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-12-15"),
        requiredSkills: ["Python", "MongoDB"],
        teamSize: 2,
        status: "planning",
        managerId: manager._id,
      },
      {
        name: "Infra Migration",
        description: "Move systems to Docker-based deployment",
        startDate: new Date("2024-07-10"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-10-10"),
        requiredSkills: ["Docker", "Node.js"],
        teamSize: 1,
        status: "active",
        managerId: manager._id,
      },
    ]);

    //  Assignments
    await Assignment.insertMany([
      {
        engineerId: engineers[0]._id,
        projectId: projects[0]._id,
        allocationPercentage: 60,
        startDate: new Date("2024-07-01"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-09-30"),
        role: "Frontend Developer",
      },
      {
        engineerId: engineers[1]._id,
        projectId: projects[1]._id,
        allocationPercentage: 40,
        startDate: new Date("2024-07-15"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-10-10"),
        role: "DevOps Lead",
      },
      {
        engineerId: engineers[2]._id,
        projectId: projects[2]._id,
        allocationPercentage: 50,
        startDate: new Date("2024-08-15"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-12-15"),
        role: "ML Engineer",
      },
    ]);

    console.log(" Seed data inserted successfully.");
  } catch (error) {
    console.error(" Error seeding data:", error);
  } finally {
    await mongoose.disconnect();
    console.log(" Disconnected from database.");
  }
})();
```

# Run seed

- npx ts-node seed.ts

Commit message:

updated README.md and added OnGoingFeature.tsx to show show user what is ongoing

README.md, after:

# Engineering Resource Management System

Track engineers, projects, assignments, and available capacity in one streamlined full-stack app.

# Tech Stack

- Frontend: <br>
  React + TypeScript <br>
  ShadCN UI + TailwindCSS <br>
  React Hook Form, contextAPI <br>
  Socket.IO client for real-time chat

- Backend: <br>
  Node.js + Express <br>
  MongoDB + Mongoose <br>
  JWT Auth, REST APIs <br>
  Socket.IO server for bi-directional communication

# Core Features

- Auth with JWT + role-based access
- Engineer dashboard: profile + assignments
- Manager dashboard: team overview + project assign
- Real-time chat feature with Socket.IO for engineers and managers

# Features of Chat System (Currently working on that)
- Engineers and Managers can send real-time messages to each other.
- Implemented using Socket.IO with WebSockets fallback.
- Supports instant delivery, typing indicators, and user presence tracking.
- Integrated with authentication, so only logged-in users can chat.

# Demo

- Frontend: https://engineering-resource-management-system-frontend.vercel.app
- Backend API: https://engineering-resource-management-system-d0zr.onrender.com

# Setup Instructions

- git clone https://github.com/sonu2027/engineering-resource-management-system.git

Backend
- cd backend
- npm install
- npm run dev

Frontend
- cd frontend
- npm install
- npm run dev
- Make sure frontend is running at http://localhost:5173

# .env

- You don't need to create .env beacuse I haven't keep it on .gitignore

# AI Usage

# Which AI tools I used and how

- I used GitHub Copilot and ChatGPT as AI tools during the development of this project.

- I primarily used Copilot for tasks like API creation, schema design, and boilerplate generation.

- For debugging, understanding errors, and getting quick solutions, I took help from both ChatGPT and Copilot.

- Both tools were extremely helpful in accelerating development and resolving issues efficiently.

- I used ChatGPT to validate my logic, clarify doubts about implementation, and understand specific concepts when I needed deeper clarity.

# Specific examples of how AI accelerated my development

AI tools like GitHub Copilot and ChatGPT significantly accelerated my development process in several ways:

- I was able to quickly set up routes and build APIs with the help of AI, which saved a lot of time.

- Whenever I faced confusion or didn’t fully understand a concept, I used AI to gain clarity and validate my logic.

- I used AI assistance to rapidly set up ShadCN UI, which made creating reusable and styled components much faster.

- I built multiple UI components efficiently using Copilot suggestions, reducing manual effort.

- AI helped me integrate and configure React Hook Form quickly for form handling and validation.

- Overall, AI helped me move faster, solve problems in real-time, and stay focused on the core logic instead of getting stuck on repetitive or confusing tasks.

# Challenges I faced with AI-generated code and how I resolved them

- At times, relying heavily on AI-generated code led to unexpected bugs that took time to debug and fix.

- One issue I faced was while making API calls — I forgot to include http://localhost:8000 in the URL, and the AI wasn't able to clearly identify or point out this small but critical mistake. Eventually, I manually noticed the problem and fixed it myself.

- I also found it challenging to fully understand some of the AI-generated code during code reviews, especially when trying to figure out how certain logic worked internally.

- Additionally, I encountered a number of errors during development. While some were difficult to trace, I was able to resolve most of them with the help of ChatGPT and Copilot after experimenting and digging deeper.

- These challenges taught me that while AI is incredibly helpful, it's important to manually validate and understand the code, especially in critical areas.

# My approach to validating and understanding AI suggestions

To validate and understand AI-generated code suggestions, I followed a hands-on approach:

- I started by using console.log() statements to check the actual output and behavior of the code.

- I traced how the data was changing throughout different parts of the codebase.

- By observing what each line was doing to the data, I was able to break down and understand even complex code that the AI suggested.

- This step-by-step debugging approach helped me gain clarity and ensured that I wasn’t blindly copying code but actually understanding and verifying its logic.

# seed file structure

```js
import mongoose from "mongoose";
import User from "../src/models/user.model";
import Project from "../src/models/project.model";
import Assignment from "../src/models/assignment.model";
import connectDB from "../src/connectDB";
import bcrypt from "bcryptjs";

(async () => {
  try {
    await connectDB();

    // You can comment out if you need fresh data in database every single time you run this seed.js

    await User.deleteMany({});
    await Project.deleteMany({});
    await Assignment.deleteMany({});

    //  Engineers
    const engineers = await User.insertMany([
      {
        name: "Alice Dev",
        email: "alice@example.com",
        role: "engineer",
        department: "frontend",
        skills: ["React", "TailwindCSS"],
        seniority: "mid",
        employmentType: "full-time",
        maxCapacity: 100,
        availableCapacity: 40,
        password: await bcrypt.hash("engineer1", 10),
      },
      {
        name: "Bob Ops",
        email: "bob@example.com",
        role: "engineer",
        department: "devOps",
        skills: ["Docker", "Node.js"],
        seniority: "senior",
        employmentType: "part-time",
        maxCapacity: 50,
        availableCapacity: 60,
        password: await bcrypt.hash("engineer2", 10),
      },
      {
        name: "Charlie Analyst",
        email: "charlie@example.com",
        role: "engineer",
        department: "ml",
        skills: ["Python", "MongoDB"],
        seniority: "junior",
        employmentType: "full-time",
        maxCapacity: 100,
        availableCapacity: 50,
        password: await bcrypt.hash("engineer3", 10),
      },
    ]);

    //  Manager
    const manager = await User.create({
      name: "Manager Mike",
      email: "manager@example.com",
      role: "manager",
      password: await bcrypt.hash("manager1", 10),
    });

    //  Projects
    const projects = await Project.insertMany([
      {
        name: "Frontend Revamp",
        description: "Modernize the UI with React and Tailwind",
        startDate: new Date("2024-07-01"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-09-30"),
        requiredSkills: ["React", "TailwindCSS"],
        teamSize: 2,
        status: "active",
        managerId: manager._id,
      },
      {
        name: "ML Insight Tool",
        description: "Develop a prediction engine with Python",
        startDate: new Date("2024-08-15"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-12-15"),
        requiredSkills: ["Python", "MongoDB"],
        teamSize: 2,
        status: "planning",
        managerId: manager._id,
      },
      {
        name: "Infra Migration",
        description: "Move systems to Docker-based deployment",
        startDate: new Date("2024-07-10"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-10-10"),
        requiredSkills: ["Docker", "Node.js"],
        teamSize: 1,
        status: "active",
        managerId: manager._id,
      },
    ]);

    //  Assignments
    await Assignment.insertMany([
      {
        engineerId: engineers[0]._id,
        projectId: projects[0]._id,
        allocationPercentage: 60,
        startDate: new Date("2024-07-01"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-09-30"),
        role: "Frontend Developer",
      },
      {
        engineerId: engineers[1]._id,
        projectId: projects[1]._id,
        allocationPercentage: 40,
        startDate: new Date("2024-07-15"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-10-10"),
        role: "DevOps Lead",
      },
      {
        engineerId: engineers[2]._id,
        projectId: projects[2]._id,
        allocationPercentage: 50,
        startDate: new Date("2024-08-15"),
        endDate: new Date("2024-12-15"),
        role: "ML Engineer",
      },
    ]);

    console.log(" Seed data inserted successfully.");
  } catch (error) {
    console.error(" Error seeding data:", error);
  } finally {
    await mongoose.disconnect();
    console.log(" Disconnected from database.");
  }
})();
```

# Run seed

- npx ts-node seed.ts
